---
id: getting-started
title: Getting Started
---


### **JavaScript** 
JavaScript is a high-level programming language used for web development. It is single-threaded, meaning it can only execute one command at a time, and is interpreted, meaning it is not compiled before execution. JavaScript is initially designed to interact with elements of web pages. Within web browsers, JavaScript consists of three main parts:

* ECMAScript provides the core functionality.  
* The Document Object Model (**DOM**) provides interfaces for interacting with elements on web pages  
* The Browser Object Model (**BOM**) provides the browser API for interacting with the web browser.

### **JavaScript BOM**
JavaScript BOM The Browser Object Model (BOM) is the core of JavaScript on the web. The BOM provides you with objects that expose the web browser’s functionality.

* Window  
  * Alert, Confirm and Prompt  
  * setTimeout  
  * setInterval  
* Location  
  * Location.href \= ‘to\_new\_url’ or location.assign(“to\_new\_url”)  
* Navigator   
* Screen  
* History  
  * back()  
  * forward()  
  * go()

### JavaScript DOM
JavaScript DOM This section covers the JavaScript Document Object Model (DOM) and shows you how to manipulate DOM elements effectively. For example : getElementById , querySelector, classList , keyboard/mouse/scroll events and more.




### Babel and Vanilla.js
The whole process makes our Vanilla JS project easier to maintain and more efficient. **Babel**, in turn, translates the latest JavaScript code (ES6+) into older JavaScript code (ES5). This makes the code compatible with all browsers, even when you use the latest JavaScript version to code. **Vanilla.js** refers to using plain JavaScript without any libraries or frameworks.

### Same origin policy 
The same-origin policy is a critical security mechanism that restricts how a document or script loaded by one origin can interact with a resource from another origin.

### TypeScript vs JavaScript
TypeScript is known as an **Object-oriented programming** language whereas JavaScript is a **prototype-based** language. Js is a dynamic typed language but typescript helps to make js in a static nature that helps to debug and make more robust programmes and helps in error handling.  
<span style={{color: '#ff00a9'}}>JavaScript is a prototype-based language, which means that it uses prototypes to inherit properties and methods from one object to another. In JavaScript, objects can be linked to other objects, forming a prototype chain.</span>

### Primitive vs Non-Primitive Data-Type

* You can add, change, or delete properties to a reference value, whereas you cannot do it with a primitive value.  
* Copying a primitive value from one variable to another creates a separate value copy. It means that changing the value in one variable does not affect the other.  
* Copying a reference from one variable to another creates a reference so that two variables refer to the same object. This means that changing the object via one variable reflects another variable.

