---
id: ts-interview
title: Interview Questions
---


### any vs unknown vs never

#### **`any`**

* **Description**: The **`any`** type allows a variable to be of any type, essentially opting out of type checking. **Use Cases**: It can be used when migrating JavaScript code to TypeScript or when working with dynamic content where you don't want strict type checking.  
  **Drawbacks**: Using **`any`** can lead to potential runtime errors because it bypasses the type system's checks.

#### **unknown**

* **Description**: The **`unknown`** type is similar to **`any`**, but it's safer. You can't perform operations on an **`unknown`** type without first asserting or narrowing its type.  
* **Use Cases**: It is used when you have a value of uncertain type and want to ensure type safety by checking the type before performing operations.  
* **Benefits**: Helps in writing safer code by ensuring type checks are performed.

#### **never**

* **Description**: The **`never`** type represents values that never occur. It is used for functions that never return (e.g., functions that throw exceptions or have infinite loops).  
* **Use Cases**: It's used to indicate that a function or code path is unreachable or will never successfully complete.  
* **Benefits**: Helps in type safety by making sure unreachable code is flagged during compilation.

**Summary**

* **`any`:** Disables type checking, allowing any type to be assigned. Use sparingly as it can lead to runtime errors.  
* **`unknown`:** Safer alternative to `any`, requires type checking before use. Use when the type is uncertain but you want to ensure type safety.  
* **`never`**: Represents values that never occur, used for functions that don't return or unreachable code. Helps in type safety by marking unreachable code paths.



### What is TypeScript?
> TypeScript is a superset of JavaScript that adds optional static typing and other features to the JavaScript language. It was developed and is maintained by Microsoft. TypeScript allows developers to write code that is more robust, predictable, and easier to maintain by introducing features such as type annotations, interfaces, and advanced object-oriented programming concepts. TypeScript is compiled down to JavaScript, meaning that browsers and Node.js can run TypeScript code as regular JavaScript after it has been transpiled.

### What is type inference in TypeScript? Can you provide an example?
>Type Inference in TypeScript is the ability of the TypeScript compiler to automatically deduce the type of a variable based on its value or context, without requiring explicit type annotations.
```ts
let num = 5; // TypeScript infers 'num' as 'number'
let message = "Hello, World!"; // TypeScript infers 'message' as 'string'
```
In this example, TypeScript automatically infers num as a number and message as a string based on the assigned values, even though no types were explicitly declared.



### What are union and intersection types in TypeScript?
<span style={{color: '#ff00a9'}}>Union</span> types allow a variable to hold multiple types. It is represented by a pipe (|) between types.

```ts
let value: string | number;
value = "Hello"; // valid
value = 42; // valid
value = true; // error, not a string or number
```

<span style={{color: '#ff00a9'}}>Intersection</span> types combine multiple types into one, allowing a variable to hold all the properties and methods from the combined types. It is represented by an ampersand (&) between types.

```ts
interface Person {
  name: string;
}
interface Employee {
  jobTitle: string;
}

let employee: Person & Employee = {
  name: "John",
  jobTitle: "Software Engineer",
};
```


### How do you define a function with typed parameters and a typed return value?
> In TypeScript, you can define a function with typed parameters and a typed return value by specifying the types of the parameters and the return type after the function name.

```ts
function add(a: number, b: number): number {
  return a + b;
}

let result = add(5, 10); // result is of type 'number'
```


### How does TypeScript handle this in functions?
> In TypeScript, the keyword this behaves differently within functions compared to regular JavaScript. TypeScript provides type safety around this by ensuring that the correct type is inferred or declared when this is used in a function.

```ts title="Regular Function"
class Person {
  name: string;
  constructor(name: string) {
    this.name = name;
  }

  greet(this: Person): void {
    console.log(`Hello, ${this.name}`);
  }
}

const person = new Person('Alice');
person.greet(); // "Hello, Alice"

```
```ts title="arrow function"
class Person {
  name: string;
  constructor(name: string) {
    this.name = name;
  }

  greet = (): void => {
    console.log(`Hello, ${this.name}`);  // 'this' refers to the instance of Person
  }
}

const person = new Person('Bob');
person.greet(); // "Hello, Bob"
```

### Explain the difference between interface and type aliases.

- Interface:
    - Used to define the structure of an object or class, including properties, methods, and their types.
    - Typically used for object shapes, class implementations, and function signatures.

```ts title="Extending and Merging"
interface Person {
  name: string;
  age: number;
}

interface Employee extends Person {
  jobTitle: string;
}

```
- Type Alias:
    - Can define any type, not just object shapes, including primitives, unions, intersections, and function types.
    - More flexible than interfaces and can handle more complex type structures.
```ts title="Extending and Merging"
type Person = {
  name: string;
  age: number;
};

type Employee = Person & {
  jobTitle: string;
};
```

### What is a readonly modifier, and where can it be used?
The readonly modifier is used to mark properties of an object or elements of an array as immutable, meaning they cannot be reassigned after their initial value has been set. This provides a way to enforce immutability in your code.


```ts
interface Person {
  readonly name: string;
  age: number;
}

const person: Person = { name: "Alice", age: 25 };
person.name = "Bob"; // Error: Cannot assign to 'name' because it is a read-only property
person.age = 26; // Valid: 'age' is not readonly


// Readonly Arrays: 
const numbers: readonly number[] = [1, 2, 3];
numbers[0] = 10; // Error: Index signature in type 'readonly number[]' only permits reading
numbers.push(4); // Error: Property 'push' does not exist on type 'readonly number[]'


// Readonly in Classes:
class Circle {
  readonly radius: number;
  
  constructor(radius: number) {
    this.radius = radius;
  }
}

const circle = new Circle(5);
circle.radius = 10; // Error: Cannot assign to 'radius' because it is a read-only property

```

### Record vs Map
- Record: A built-in TypeScript utility type that defines an object with a specific key type and value type. It is used for type-safe objects with keys of a certain type.

- Map: A JavaScript collection type (not TypeScript-specific) that holds key-value pairs where both keys and values can be any type. Maps are more flexible than Record, allowing non-string keys.

```ts
type PersonRecord = Record<string, number>;
const ages: PersonRecord = { Alice: 25, Bob: 30 };


const map = new Map<string, number>();
map.set('Alice', 25);
map.set('Bob', 30);
```

### Extract and Exclude Utility Types
- Extract`<T, U>`: Extracts types from T that are assignable to U. It keeps the parts of T that are compatible with U.

- Exclude`<T, U>`: Excludes types from T that are assignable to U. It removes the types from T that are present in U.

```ts
type A = string | number | boolean;
type B = Extract<A, string | number>; // Result: string | number

type A = string | number | boolean;
type B = Exclude<A, number>; // Result: string | boolean
```

### Generics
> Generics in TypeScript allow you to define components (functions, classes, or interfaces) that work with any type while still maintaining type safety. Instead of specifying a specific type, you use a placeholder that can be replaced with any type when the component is used.

Generics are useful because they provide flexibility and reusability without losing the benefits of type checking.

```ts
interface Box<T> {
  value: T;
}

const stringBox: Box<string> = { value: 'Hello, World!' };
const numberBox: Box<number> = { value: 42 };

```


 

### `as const`
> The as const assertion is used to narrow the type of an object, array, or literal to its literal type, meaning that it makes the value immutable and its type readonly.

```ts
const numbers = [1, 2, 3] as const; // Inferred as readonly [1, 2, 3]
// numbers[0] = 10; // Error: Index signature in type 'readonly [1, 2, 3]' only permits reading
```


### What is the React.FC type, and why is it useful?

React.FC (or React.FunctionComponent) is a type in TypeScript that is used to define functional components in React. It provides type-checking and auto-completion for function components, particularly for props, including common patterns like children.

```ts
import React from 'react';

type ButtonProps = {
  label: string;
};

const Button: React.FC<ButtonProps> = ({ label, children }) => {
  return (
    <button>
      {label} {children}
    </button>
  );
};
```

**Why React.FC is Useful:**
- Type Safety: It provides type inference for props and ensures you pass the correct types to the component.
- Automatic children Prop: You don’t need to explicitly define children in your component if it supports it, simplifying the code.
- Consistency: Helps maintain consistency across your components and projects when defining functional components.

### What are declaration files (*.d.ts), and when should you use them?
A declaration file (*.d.ts) in TypeScript is a special type of file that provides type information about existing JavaScript code or libraries that are written in plain JavaScript or lack TypeScript definitions. These files do not contain any executable code but define the types of variables, functions, classes, and objects used in a project.

**Summary of When to Use *.d.ts Files:**
- Third-party libraries: To add type definitions for libraries that don’t have built-in TypeScript support.
- Global variables: To declare global variables available across your project.
- Custom code: To provide TypeScript type definitions for custom JavaScript code.
